You seem very detached from your previous experiences in movies.
"Johnny Mnemonic", on the other hand, seems very personal to you.
Why is that?
I wrote the original story in 1980. I think it was perhaps the second
piece of fiction I ever wrote in my life.  It held up very good after all
these years.  "Johnny" was a start for many creative processes:
it was in fact the root source of "Neuromancer" and "Count Zero".
It is only fair that the first script of mine that goes into production
should come from that, from my early career.
The world of "Johnny Mnemonic" takes for granted the Berlusconi
completion process, I mean the media baron becoming one of the
Country's leaders.  I think the distinction between politicians and
media is gonna disappear. It already has, in effect. It is very sad.
It's like saying that the theories you imagined in your science fiction
stories are becoming real...
Yeah, but people shouldn't look at science fiction like they look at
"real" fiction.  They shouldn't expect that this is what the future
is gonna look like.  We (ED. science fiction writers) are sort of
charlatans: we come up with a few ideas and we make a living out of that.
When I wrote "Neuromancer", I would have never imagined AIDS
and the collapse of the USSR.  We never get the future right.
I always thought that USSR was this big winter bear that would
always exist. And look at what happened.  In 1993 I wrote an
afterword for the Hungarian version of "Neuromancer".  I wrote that
nothing lives forever, and that it's time that the winds of democracy
blow over the East.  But now, after the arrival of people like
Zhirinowsky, I have second thoughts again and I fear for them.
Now you also write "geo-anthropological" reports...
That's right.  I did a portrait of Singapore for "Wired Magazine".
That place gave me the creeps.
You are considered the true father of cyberpunk.  What do you think
of how this word has spread in the world and has gained new meanings ?
It depends whether you believe in such a thing.  "Cyberpunk" has
become a historical word, one of these words which you use to
describe a definite period of time.  The risk is that it could suddenly
become outdated, passe.  Now it is a very fashionable thing to say:
wearing cyberpunk outfit or behaving cyberpunk has become hip:
you see it on MTV.  I was never comfortable with this interpretation.
Billy Idol (ED. he released in 1993 the album "Cyberpunk") has
turned it into something very silly.
Finally, I think that cyberpunk is one of these journalistic terms,
that media like to rely on.  I am aware that most young writers
are delighted being considered cyberpunk authors.  But I'm older.
I remember well the Sixties.  I know that once you have a "label"
attached onto you, it is over.
Let's go back to "Johnny Mnemonic".  Which direction have you
given the screenplay?
"Johnny" is about the politics of Information.  It's an action film
of course, but it doesn't forego for flashy and graphic FX: there's too
much of that already on MTV.  Besides, Billy Idol burned that look.
We preferred opting for an anti-realistic look: we want to plunge
the audience into a very strange but consistent universe.  In short,
we have decided to tell a story.  That's what science fiction
literature has often managed to achieve, unlike most films.
Which science fiction movies you like most?
I like "Blade Runner", Andrej Tarkowski's "Stalker", Chris Marker's
"La jetee", and also the British pilot for the "Max Headroom"
series.  (ED. it was directed by Rocky Morton & Annabel Jenkel)
"Johnny Mnemonic" has a superstar, Keanu Reeves.  What do you
think of his portrayal of your character?
Keanu is fantastic! I have this problem: I have never been able to
describe the character of Johnny, until he came aboard.  One day in
the early stages of developement, we were discussing the character,
and I wasn't making a good job of doing that.  But he really
got Johnny from day one. It helped me better understand this
person that I had imagined, so I was able to make small
adjustments to the story. I have always had a good attitude
towards actors, and Keanu helped me reinforce that idea.
Once "Johnny" got its second chance, Robert (Longo) and I have
talked to each others on the phone at least once every day.
Subsequently, I was often on the sets during the filming, doing
rewrites.  The sets of this picture were awesome!  Everything was
hung 50 feet up in the air.  They were quite dangerous:  you really
had to watch where to put your feet.  But I was able to not black out.
You and Bruce Sterling are the forefathers of the new science fiction.
Isn't it ironical that he is very fascinated by hackers and the new edge,
whereas you're not a technical person?
Bruce practically lives on the Internet. I don't even have a modem
or e-mail. My computer is outdated by any standards of criteria.
I never was a technical guy and never will be.  I'm a writer,
and poetry and pop culture are the two things which fascinate me most.
I'm not deeply excited by hi-tech.  The Edge of the U2 was over here
the other day and he was showing me Net stuff. He showed how he
could telnet to his Los Angeles computer and he was very excited.
I'll never be like that.  However, I feel obliged to be ambivalent
towards technology.  I can't be a "techie", but I can't hate it, either.
You have written "Virtual Light".  So, what do you think of Virtual
Reality ?
If we take what I consider the "Sunday paper supplement" of VR,
I mean Goggles & Gloves, I think that it has become very obvious,
very cliche.  I think that real VR is gonna come out from the new
generation of visual effects in movies.  I met Jim Cameron when he
was editing "Terminator 2": he showed me the clips of the T-1000
emerging from fire in the L.A. canal.  He said they were gonna use
the actor for the whole shot, but it was easier for them to do it in
digital.  This is the future. One day there will be entire virtual
replicas of real actors.
Incidentally, the book I'm writing now is about virtual celebrities.
It's the story of a guy who becomes obsessed with the virtual replica of
a star, and falls in love with her.
You're not fascinated by technology, and yet you come up with ideas
on the edge...
When I write my books, my favorite part is always "art direction",
not the plot.  I admit I like giving people a visual impression
of the world I'm creating. Then, I have to remind myself that
I have to tell a story, foremost.
Another issue you focus on are Information Superhighways.
What actions have you taken?
Bruce Sterling and I went to the National Academy in Washington to
address the Al Gore people.  We told them that this is the last
chance to give the poorest schools equal chances than the richest.
In a few years it will be too late and we won't be able to fill up the gap.
To me, Information Highways are best described by the most
interesting image I've seen on TV during the Los Angeles riot.
A Radio Shack shop (ED. a chain of shops selling consumer
electronics gear) was being looted.  Next to that there was an Apple
shop, and it was untouched.  People wanted to steal portable TVs
and CD players, not computers.  I think this clearly indicated the
gaps of culture, or simply the gaps of chances, in our society.
Besides, the Information Highway issue gives the public a false
perception.  They don't wanna offer you exhaustive accesses to
information; they wanna offer you a new shopping mall.
What do you think of the Clipper issue?
The NSA wants to legislate that every computer manifactured in the
U.S. will have a chip built inside that will allow the Government
to decrypt the information.  The worst thing is that people are not
informed of what is at stake here.  Who would buy a computer with a
spy inside?  The Clipper chip is an admission of incompetence.
They say they wanna be able to decrypt the information that would
jeopardize National Security.  But to can prevent the Medellin cartel
to buy - say - into a Swiss corporation which comes up with a new
encryption system which totally cuts out the Clipper?
Encryption programs are stronger and stronger.  There is a new one
called Stego, which is free on Internet.  It takes written material and
hides it in visual elements.  I send a digitized e-postcard from
Cannes and there is half a novel hidden in its data.  I've seen it work.
I haven't understood the half of it yet.
Man, the Clipper chip is fucked anyway.  Most of the new edge guys
are into computers, and they're coming up with new gear nobody
had the slightest clue about five years ago.  I saw recently a
prototype which looked like a beeper, but it was a virtual telephone.
Unfortunately, we have to deal with more paper than before.  We are
submerged by tons of paper!